## Aim 2: Generate a benchmark dataset of harmonized public data to evaluate the extent to which HCA cell types capture rheumatic disease biology.

The HCA's partnership with the Immunological Genome Project (immgenH) will provide single-cell gene expression-based immunocyte phenotyping at an unprecedented resolution.
A compendium comprised of bulk gene expression data from autoimmune/rheumatic diseases is exceptionally well-suited to evaluating the disease relevance of these immunocyte data.
The _objective of this aim_ is to build and share real and simulated benchmark datasets to evaluate the quality of the cell-type signatures.
This will allow CZI to evaluate techniques, including VAEs and other methods, for defining cell-type-specific expression signatures from the HCA's single-cell datasets by measuring their ability to decompose bulk, whole-tissue autoimmune/rheumatic disease data.

We will generate simulated bulk datasets drawn from HCA-identified cell types by combining their expression profiles at different proportions.
We will also build a multi-tissue autoimmune/rheumatic disease compendium from existing public datasets that we have curated (currently more than 12,000 samples).
This compendium includes samples from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), sarcoidosis, and inflammatory bowel disorders among many other diseases.
Such a compendium lets us determine the extent to which HCA-derived cell type signatures capture disease-relevant information in a way that matches previous literature.
For instance, we expect to detect higher proportions of activated macrophages in lupus nephritis samples than controls [@doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1103031].

These bulk compendia (simulated and real data) will enable HCA participants (computational-method and molecular-assay developers) to directly compare approaches where we expect their most immediate translational impact: application to existing datasets to explain disease-relevant phenomena via a single-cell perspective.

### Results

TBD.
